Al jaer senior political analyst mwan
Bashar is joining us now I'd like to
talk about how this was bypass this
bypass Congress mwan in a moment but
first is is there something to be said
uh over the timing of this this
particular deal considering what's
happening on the ground and the Israel
is widening their offensive and
seemingly focusing a lot now on the
south and on Kan yunes oh yes there's no
doubt about that uh the netan government
has decided to widen the war it is
fighting all over Gaza now they say
there's no place safe in Gaza there's no
place where there is no war in Gaza so
you can imagine that the Israelis are
bombing every possible Target in Gaza
includ including those places where
Palestinians have taken Refuge
apparently now for a good number of
weeks the Israelis have been
bombing uh places where Palestinians
took Refuge which is you know kind of
incredulous in so many ways but if I
allow me just to put this all in his
historical context because I've been
listening to the figures you've been
giving and they are accurate in the
sense of they are to the letter I've
seen estimates about how Israel has
received between 150 to$ 250 billion
dollars from the United States since
1967 because it depends how you count
right or it depends your accounting I'll
give you just one simple
example when you give Aid to Israel when
as an American give Aid to is gives uh
um donations to Israel to an Israel
Associated charity it's tax deductible
in the United States you can imagine the
number of said American Jews or American
zionists American Evangelical Christians
who donate to Charities that work in
Israel it's all becomes tax deductible
in the United States that's just one way
of looking at it but I've seen estimates
that are unprecedented in international
relations since international relations
became a thing five centuries ago no two
other states have exchanged as much aid
meaning the United States to Israel in
modern international relations it
doesn't
exist in after 2014 when Ukraine become
became a bit in in trouble in hot water
with Russia from 2014 to 2020 Ukraine is
few times bigger than Israel it got a
fraction a fraction of the aid that
America gave to Israel than that to that
one America gave to keev at the time for
many years so the nature of the US
Israel relations is unique in human
history the nature of the aid that
Israel gets notably military aid from
the United States is unique in modern
international relations the fact that
most of it could be spent in Israel not
in the United States is unique in
American Aid military aid to other
countries because most military aid or
financial aid gets to be spent in the
United States like for example I went to
Egypt right but Israel no it's a a whole
other uh situation so when we look at
the figures now and we look at what's
happening in the sense of Israel's
unraveling genocide in Gaza you still
asked the question so why today Israel
is rushing Aid to Egypt so Biden for a
for many years because you know he was
in the senate for something like 40
years or or something he's been in
Washington since 1972 50
years so for many years he been saying
if Israel did not exist we would have
had to create it yeah because Israel
serves
our interest in the Middle East so maybe
that was true in the 1980s we don't have
time to discuss it now or in the 1990s
or even the year 2000 maybe but where
exactly is the national interest today
when Israel is no longer a strategic
asset presumed Str asset but it's a
strategic liability Israel cannot even
win a war against a militia basically a
resistance group in Gaza that was under
siege for 17 years right so certainly
Israel is no longer military asset it's
a military and a strategic burden on the
United States well I mean it's not just
the AIDS that the US as you're saying
continues to give Israel but in this
particular case and for the second time
in a month uh the Biden Administration
is willing to bypass Congress to give
them this Aid how are we to explain that
and what's the end game here for the US
well clearly um this is uh politically
suspect and I think we there are going
to be a lot of criticism of that in
Washington twice in a month to bypass
Congress to give Aid to a country that's
basically is involved in war crimes if
not genocide and clearly the idea that
this is self-defeating in the sense that
America has a strategy that is built on
the idea that we need Israel needs to
exit the war as we know it today to
another phase phase three what is less
intensive and yet it's giving it arms
that serves its phase two when which
which the which is supposed to leave
right so it doesn't make no sense
whatsoever and we spoke about how
morally defect how morally scandalous
this thing is so the only explanation
that I have is that the Biden
Administration is so boxed in behind the
Nan government it it can no longer see
the um what do you call that the woods
from the tree right it's clearly stuck
behind netanyahu's schedule netanyahu's
agenda netanyahu's personal ambition
netanyahu's endgame in Gaza and it is
unable to break away from that at the
risk of
alienating Middle Eastern allies its own
public opinion I would even go further
at the risk of losing the election Biden
could lose the election in
2024 because he's so stubborn of risking
his administration his legacy at that of
unknown liar basically Benjamin Nel look
very broad question for our last
question Maran but uh we've just gotten
the latest figures from the uh from the
health Ministry in Gaza and they're
saying that so far 21,6 72 Palestinians
have been killed and
56,600 Israel is running our way running
uh out of targets to hit in Gaza it's
running out of targets after tens of
thousands of bombings of different
locations in Gaza sooner or later this
hanun thing is going to end and what's
what's next I think the Biden
Administration as we've been saying also
needs something some respite from this
genocide that's unraveling in front of
the entire International public opinion
so they might reach a deal this deal
could be somewhere in between what
Israel insists on what Hamas insists on
you know a third way a compromise of
sort
but I think Israel would want to
continue with the war regardless so it
might take a break for a week or two or
three take a rest from the bombing from
the killing of
children possible in in return for
dozens of captives Hamas would also
benefit from that because it needs some
kind of respite as well what about their
plans to in their own words of some
Israeli officials to ethnically cleanse
the Palestinians push them out that's
happening de facto because Gaza is
becoming increasingly unlivable I've
just read a report by a scientist who
refers to other scientists saying that
if the continuation if the situation
continues as we know it today all things
being equal a quarter of the population
of Gaza could die out of disease a
quarter of the population I cannot get
my mind around the idea of one child
dying what does it mean really one child
dying for no reason whatsoever other
than political power and ambition right
and now we're talking about a quarter of
the population in Gaza at the risk of
dying from diseases not the bombing
diseases all things being equal and if
the situation continues as it is today
all right thank you so much M thank
you